arXiv:2501.00114v1 [eess.AS] 30 Dec 2024

DiCoW: Diarization-Conditioned Whisper for Target
Speaker Automatic Speech Recognition
Alexander Poloka,1,∗, Dominik Klementa,b,1 , Martin Kocoura,1 , Jiangyu
Hana , Federico Landinia , Bolaji Yusufa , Matthew Wiesnerb,c , Sanjeev
Khudanpurb,c , Jan Černockýa , Lukáš Burgeta
a

Speech@FIT, Brno University of Technology, Czechia
b
CLSP,Johns Hopkins University, USA
c
HLTCOE, Johns Hopkins University, USA

Abstract
Speaker-attributed automatic speech recognition (ASR) in multi-speaker
environments remains a significant challenge, particularly when systems conditioned on speaker embeddings fail to generalize to unseen speakers. In
this work, we propose Diarization-Conditioned Whisper (DiCoW), a novel
approach to target-speaker ASR that leverages speaker diarization outputs
as conditioning information. DiCoW extends the pre-trained Whisper model
by integrating diarization labels directly, eliminating reliance on speaker embeddings and reducing the need for extensive speaker-specific training data.
Our method introduces frame-level diarization-dependent transformations
(FDDT) and query-key biasing (QKb) techniques to refine the model’s focus on target speakers while effectively handling overlapping speech. By
leveraging diarization outputs as conditioning signals, DiCoW simplifies the
workflow for multi-speaker ASR, improves generalization to unseen speakers
and enables more reliable transcription in real-world multi-speaker recordings. Additionally, we explore the integration of a connectionist temporal
classification (CTC) head to Whisper and demonstrate its ability to improve
transcription efficiency through hybrid decoding. Notably, we show that our
approach is not limited to Whisper; it also provides similar benefits when applied to the Branchformer model. We validate DiCoW on real-world datasets,
∗

Corresponding author
Email address: ipoloka@fit.vut.cz (Alexander Polok)
1
These authors contributed equally.

Preprint submitted to Computer Speech & Language

January 3, 2025

including AMI and NOTSOFAR-1 from CHiME-8 challenge, as well as synthetic benchmarks such as Libri2Mix and LibriCSS, enabling direct comparisons with previous methods. Results demonstrate that DiCoW enhances the
model’s target-speaker ASR capabilities while maintaining Whisper’s accuracy and robustness on single-speaker data.
Keywords: Diarization-Conditioned Whisper, Target-Speaker ASR,
Speaker Diarization, Long-Form ASR, Whisper Adaptation
1. Introduction
The rapid development of deep learning techniques and vast increases in
available training data and computing resources have made low-error-rate
ASR systems on single speaker recordings viable at reasonable latencies [1].
Consequently, the research community has focused [2, 3, 4, 5] on the more
challenging task of multi-speaker ASR, whose goal is the accurate transcription of multiple speakers in a recording, often including speaker-attributed
ASR, whose goal is also to assign a speaker label to each spoken word.
In this work, we focus on speaker-attributed ASR by adapting a singlespeaker ASR system using speaker diarization information to produce transcripts for all speakers.
Speaker-attributed ASR-systems that combine diarization and speech
recognition mainly operate in one of three ways: (a) running ASR and diarization independently, capturing the respective word and timing information from each, and using this timing information to assign words to speakers
throughout a long conversation [6]; (b) using a fully cascaded pipeline where
various orderings of diarization, speaker extraction or source separation are
combined with ASR [7, 8]; and (c) using target speaker ASR (TS-ASR),
where, in lieu of any source extraction or separation, the original audio is
directly input along with some speaker conditioning, so that the system transcribes the speech belonging to the conditioned speaker [9].
The conventional approach to TS-ASR is to extract speaker embeddings
corresponding to the target speaker and to have these embeddings as an
auxiliary input to the ASR system [10, 11]. Although the use of speaker
embeddings from a pre-trained speaker embedding extractor [12, 13, 14] can
give clues to the ASR about what information in its input to utilize and
what information to ignore, it implicitly requires learning to map speaker
embeddings to ASR speech embeddings. Learning a robust mapping gene2

ralizing to new speaker sets at test time, especially when the speaker embeddings are trained independently, requires having a large number of speakers
in the multi-speaker ASR training set. While this is manageable for simulated multi-speaker data (for which a large number of speakers could be
obtained), data scarcity is arguably the most significant challenge for “in-thewild” multi-speaker ASR; it is therefore, imperative to develop systems that
can be efficiently trained on the order of tens of hours of real conversational
data.
In this paper, we propose Diarization-Conditioned Whisper (DiCoW),
a semi-end-to-end approach to speaker-attributed ASR where we condition
Whisper [15] on diarization outputs, unlike prior approaches relying on speaker
embeddings or specific modules to model speaker information. We use Whisper as the base ASR system in order to take advantage of its large-scale
pretraining, multi-domain robustness, and long-form capabilities. However,
we also present results with another “generic” single-speaker system, showcasing that our proposed method can attain strong results in combination
with different ASR models. By directly using diarization labels, there is no
need for the model to learn to map speaker and ASR embedding subspaces.
This is accomplished by means of speaker conditioning in the form of timespeaker activity probabilities.
To this end, we propose a pair of methods for incorporating speaker activity information into Whisper.
The first of our methods, termed Query-Key Biasing, produces a mask
for each target speaker from the diarization outputs. This mask is then used
to modify the attention scores: the scores for frames that do not correspond
to the desired speaker are attenuated, while those belonging to the target
speaker are kept intact. This allows Whisper to focus on the target speaker’s
ASR in the presence of large regions of silence and non-target speaker speech.
We note that the attention scores are modified with trainable parameters so
that the attenuation of non-target-speaker positions is only enforced at the
beginning of training, and the model is still afforded the flexibility to learn
how much non-target information to keep.
In the second method, named Frame-Level Diarization Dependent Transformations (FDDT), the model is provided with more fine-grained access
to the diarization output. Specifically, for each target speaker, an external diarizer categorizes speech frames into silence, target speaker, non-target
speaker and overlapped speech. For each of the four categories and each
Whisper encoder layer, a trainable affine transformation is introduced to
3

transform the input frames belonging to the given category before they are
fed into the next encoder layer. Thus, the model is equipped to learn how to
handle the different regions of speech.
We experimentally validate our methods by fine-tuning Whisper on various datasets: NOTSOFAR-1 [16], AMI [17], and Libri2Mix [18] using groundtruth speaker segmentation information. At inference time, we utilize speaker
diarization labels generated by an end-to-end speaker diarization system with
vector clustering [19, 20]. We also evaluate our system on LibriCSS [21] without fine-tuning it on this dataset.
Our experiments on both real and synthetic datasets show that, without
considerably degrading its single-speaker recognition performance, our proposed methods imbue Whisper with strong speaker-attributed ASR capabilities across datasets, even when automatic diarization is used for conditioning.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
• Section 2 provides coverage of closely related works.
• Section 3 gives a background of Whisper and our modifications to reduce its hallucination tendencies.
• Section 4 describes the methods we propose to make a diarizationconditioned Whisper capable of target-speaker ASR.
• Section 5 describes the setup of our experiments, including datasets,
metrics, and training details.
• Section 6 shows the results of our experiments.
• Section 8 concludes the paper with a summary of our findings.
2. Related Works
Diarization-based ASR: The integration of ASR and diarization has been
explored in various studies using different techniques. These include adding
speaker role tokens during ASR decoding [22], clustering speaker embeddings,
and mapping them to ASR tokens [23]—which requires deriving word timings
for the tokens after decoding—and jointly producing ASR tokens, speaker
tags, and timings [24]. While training a single model from scratch to perform
both tasks at once can exploit the synergies between “what is said” and “who
said it”, large training corpora are necessary, which are either only available
4

to large companies or of synthetic nature in academic settings. In contrast,
we focus in this work on leveraging existing pre-trained models to reduce the
training burden.
Multi-speaker extensions of Whisper: There have been recent works extending Whisper for multi-speaker ASR. In [25], the model is prompt-tuned
with a target speaker embedding so that the model recognizes only the speech
of that speaker. Alternatively, in [26], Whisper is activated using speech from
the target speaker instead of an embedding so that smaller modifications to
the original architecture are required compared to [25]. In [27], a “speakerquerying” module is added to produce speaker prompts that are used as input
in the decoder. While similar in motivation, our work differs from [25, 26, 27]
in that instead of using speaker embeddings or enrollment speech, we directly
utilize speaker activities. This simplifies the interaction with external modules and elides any need for selecting and processing enrollment speech.
3. Long-form Modeling with Whisper
OpenAI’s Whisper [15] is an attention-based encoder-decoder model for
automatic speech recognition and speech translation. The widely used model
is trained on an order of magnitude more data than other open-source models,
which was found to be the key to achieving state-of-the-art performance on a
wide range of ASR benchmarks and popularized a number of useful features
for ASR.
First, several speech processing tasks need to be performed “in the wild,”
and it might be relevant to perform them jointly, so Whisper is designed to be
prompted with token-based control sequences in order to perform ASR and
additionally return time voice activity detection (VAD) or language identification (LID) decisions, among other complementary information.
Whisper incorporates previous text conditioning, where prior transcriptions are fed as context to the decoder. This feature enables effective processing of long-form audio, such as meetings, lectures, or podcasts, by maintaining context across extended recordings.
Long-form audio processing is particularly relevant for multi-speaker ASR,
which requires handling continuous dialogues rather than isolated utterances.
However, extending Whisper to support multi-speaker scenarios introduces
new challenges, such as managing overlapping speech and multi-speaker outputs. Leveraging Whisper as a foundation benefits from its extensive pretraining on large-scale data, reducing the need for additional task-specific
5

training data.
In this work, we propose several extensions to Whisper that address these
challenges and enable its application to multi-speaker ASR. The Whisper
model is described in the following section, and our proposed methods are
detailed in Section 4.
3.1. Whisper
Whisper is available in variants ranging from 38M to 1.54B parameters
and has been trained on up to 5 million hours of weakly (pseudo) labeled data.
It employs an encoder-decoder Transformer [28] architecture, processing the
log-Mel spectrogram as input X ∈ RF ×T , where T = 3000 corresponds to 30
seconds of audio. Shorter audio segments are padded with zero signal, while
longer ones are processed sequentially. The number of Mel frequency bins,
F , is 80 in earlier versions and 128 in later versions.
The spectrogram is passed through two 1-dimensional convolutional layers
that increase the feature dimension to dm and downsample the sequence by
a factor of two. The encoder layers transform these features into hidden
representations H ∈ Rdm ×T /2 , which the decoder uses autoregressively to
generate text tokens ŷ, conditioned on task-specific special tokens g. The
process is formally defined as:
H = AudioEncoderϕe (X),

ŷt = TextDecoderϕd (g, ŷ1:t−1 , H),

(1)

where ϕe and ϕd denote the encoder and decoder parameters, respectively.
Whisper incorporates two primary task-specific tokens: ⟨|transcribe|⟩ for
transcription and ⟨|translate|⟩ for translation tasks. Additionally, the token ⟨|notimestamps|⟩ can be used to suppress the decoding of timestamps.
The inclusion of language-specific tokens, such as ⟨|en|⟩ for English, enables
Whisper to condition decoding for specific languages and tasks. Furthermore, Whisper supports previous text conditioning by allowing an optional
sequence of tokens from prior decoding as input, facilitating context-aware
transcription or translation.
In this study, we utilize the large-v3-turbo variant of Whisper in all our
Whisper experiments. This version builds on prior work on distilling Whisper
models [29] and reduces the number of decoder layers from 32 (large-v3) to
4 without significantly harming the model’s performance. This architectural
modification significantly reduces autoregressive decoding time, making it
more practical for real-world applications. The large-v3-turbo model was
6

trained on a mixture of 1 million hours of weakly labeled audio and 4 million
hours of pseudo-labeled audio derived from the large-v3 model. In this work,
we turn Whisper into a TS-ASR system by extending and adapting it to
condition on diarization information in order to decode speakers of interest.
3.2. CTC Head for Whisper
Inspired by [30], we incorporate a connectionist temporal classification
(CTC) [31] head into Whisper to improve the alignment of encoder representations and reduce decoder hallucinations. The CTC head operates on the
encoder’s hidden representations, enforcing better correspondence between
input audio and output tokens.
It first applies a Transformer layer, followed by two 1-dimensional convolutional layers with a stride of 2, reducing the sequence length from 1500 to
375 (approximately matching the maximum sequence length in the decoder).
This subsampling helps to reduce the computational overhead caused by the
final linear projection, which maps the hidden representations from dimensionality dm to vocabulary size V ≈ 50k.
Formally, given the encoder’s hidden representations H ∈ Rdm ×T /2 , the
CTC head computes:
Z = Linear(Conv(SelfAttention(H))),

(2)

where Z ∈ RV ×T /8 represents the output logits.
The CTC head enables efficient single-pass decoding and accurate results
when combined with the autoregressive decoder [32]. It also supports selfspeculative decoding [33].
3.3. Joint CTC/Attention Decoding with Whisper
We observed improved convergence when the CTC head does not generate timestamp tokens, which led us to modify the ESPNet [34] CTC prefix
scoring implementation2 . Specifically, we adjusted the scoring procedure to
retain current states without restoring the next tokens when the autoregressive decoder prefers timestamp tokens. This modification facilitates joint
CTC/Attention decoding, wherein the CTC head operates over a distinct
2

https://github.com/espnet/espnet/blob/master/espnet/nets/ctc_prefix_
score.py

7

subset of labels, diverging from those used by the autoregressive attentionbased decoder.
The decoding objective in this setup is defined as a combination of the
sequence probabilities from the CTC and attention-based models. Let C be a
sequence, pctc (C|X) be the sequence probability given by the CTC model, and
patt (C|X) be the sequence probability given by the attention-based model.
The decoding objective is then formulated as:
Ĉ = arg max∗ (λ log pctc (C|X) + (1 − λ) log patt (C|X)) ,
C∈U

(3)

where λ is a weight parameter controlling the balance between the CTC and
attention model outputs [32] and U ∗ is the set of sequences, given by a beam
of the top-k most likely hypotheses.
Additionally, we streamlined the implementation by vectorizing key operations, improving computational efficiency, and enabling support for batched
beam decoding. Our implementation is made publicly available3 .
4. Diarization-Conditioned Whisper
In this section, we introduce the proposed approaches for conditioning on
speaker activity. While Whisper serves as the base single-speaker ASR model
for our explanations, these methods are generalizable and can be applied to
other models, as shown in Section 6.6.
We begin by defining conditioning masks derived from the speech activity
of each speaker, which serves as the foundation for all our proposed systems.
We then describe three distinct mechanisms for utilizing these masks:
1. Input masking: directly masks the input audio based on speaker
activity.
2. Query-key biasing: selectively biases the attention weights using
information from the masks.
3. Frame-level diarization-dependent transformations: incorporate
the full masks to condition encoder representations in a more comprehensive manner.
3

https://github.com/BUTSpeechFIT/TS-ASR-Whisper

8

4.1. Silence, Target, Non-Target, and Overlap Masks
Let D ∈ [0, 1]S×T , where S is the number of speakers in the recording,
and T is the number of frames. The matrix D represents the diarization
output, with d(s, t) denoting the probability that the speaker s is active in
time frame t.
The dependency on the number of speakers in D can be a limiting factor
for easily incorporating this mask into the model. To address this, we treat
each speaker independently. Let sk represent the target speaker. We define a
distribution over the following mutually exclusive events for a frame at time
t:
• S: The time frame t represents silence.
• T : The target speaker, sk , is the only active speaker in the time frame
t.
• N : One or more non-target speakers, s ̸= sk are active and the target
speaker, sk , is not active at the time frame t.
• O: The target speaker sk is active while at least one non-target speaker
s ̸= sk is also active at time frame t, denoting an overlap.
The probabilities of these events occurring in the time frame t can be
calculated as:

ptS =

S
Y
(1 − d(s, t))

(4)

s=1

ptT

= d(sk , t)

S
Y

(1 − d(s, t))

(5)

s=1
s̸=sk


ptN = 1 − ptS − d (sk , t)
ptO = d(sk , t) − ptT

(6)
(7)

This definition allows us to use a fixed-sized STNO (Silence, Target, Non
⊤
target, Overlap) mask Mt = ptS ptT ptN ptO .
Note that the mask is speaker-dependent, so decoding each target speaker
involves using a different STNO mask, which results in a different transcript.
9

4.2. Input Masking
Let x ∈ RT denote the input audio signal. The masked signal xmasked is
computed as:
xmasked (t) = x(t) · (ptT + ptO ),

(8)

Hence, if the target speaker is not active, the output audio signal is equal to
0 (i.e., silence).
However, similar to source separation approaches, this method has limitations. It can introduce artifacts because it creates an unnatural version
of the input signal. Furthermore, it treats all frames in which the target
speaker is active equally, without taking into account if there is an overlap
with other speakers, which can potentially harm the performance.
4.3. Query-Key Biasing Conditioning
An alternative approach to steer the model’s attention away from nontarget segments is to integrate target-speaker masks with the model’s internal
representations by incorporating them into encoder/decoder attention masks.
Compared to the input masking method, attention masking does not introduce artificial silence in the audio signal, reducing the chance of artifacts and
potentially leading to better performance.
For simplicity, let us assume a single attention head. Let Wq , Wk ∈
Rdm ×dm denote the query and key projection matrices and qi , kj ∈ Rdm the
query and key, respectively. The unnormalized attention score between qi , kj
is defined as:
(Wq qi )T (Wk kj )
√
.
(9)
aij =
dm
To obtain normalized attention weights, the softmax function is applied
across the j-dimension of aij
If we assume that acoustic information is aligned across time, masking
out non-target speaker frames forces the model to ignore information irrelevant to the target speaker transcript (i.e., other speakers, silence, etc.).
However, pure attention masking leaves the model no chance for unmasking
and possibly attending to non-target frames, which makes adaptation and
speaker-tracking learning impossible.
As a solution, we decided to bias the encoder self-attention and the decoder cross-attention by extending queries, and keys and initializing corresponding projections in the following way:
10

 
 




qi
kj
Wq 0
Wk 0
q̂i =
, k̂j =
, Ŵq =
, Ŵk =
0 1
1
−c
0 1

(10)

where c ∈ R+
0 is a bias factor set to 0 if kj corresponds to a target speaker
frame and to a predefined constant otherwise. We name this approach querykey biasing conditioning (QKb).
It is easy to observe that, after initialization, if kj represents a target
speaker frame, aij remains intact. On the other hand, if kj represents a nontarget speaker frame, the calculation of aij changes as:




Wq q i
Wk k j
Ŵq q̂i =
, Ŵk k̂j =
,
(11)
1
−c



 W k kj
T
(Wq qi ) 1
= (Wq qi )T (Wk kj ) − c.
(12)
−c
It is important to note that fine-tuning the Whisper model with extended
queries and keys changes the extended attention projection matrices Ŵq and
Ŵk , which controls the level of attention biasing.
4.3.1. Shifted Positional Embeddings
Masked silences within an utterance can lead to hallucinations and instabilities during Whisper’s training. The main reason is that the decoder
cross-attends to discontinuous parts of the encoder embedding sequence after
QK biasing is applied. To account for this, instead of adding the original sequence of positional embeddings, we shift the positional embeddings on target
speaker frames and repeat the previous positional embeddings on the nontarget ones (i.e., for the following sequence of target and non-target frames:
TTTNNTT, the positional embeddings would represent the following positions: 1233345), which ensures that the embeddings the decoder attends to
have continuous positions.
4.4. Frame-Level Diarization Dependent Transformations
The third and most sophisticated approach to diarization conditioning is
frame-level diarization dependent transformations (FDDT) depicted in Figure 1. It modifies the frame-by-frame model inputs based on the diarization
outputs and unlike the previous methods, it uses all four STNO masks.
Let Zl ∈ Rdm ×T represent the frame-by-frame inputs to the l-th (Transformer) layer. We transform these hidden representations by applying four
11

Figure 1: Proposed Diarization-Conditioned Whisper model with STNO mask example.

12

l
l
affine STNO layer- and class-specific transformations: WSl , WTl , WN
, WO
∈
dm ×dm
l
l
l
l
dm
R
together with biases bS , bT , bN , bO ∈ R to obtain new speakerspecific hidden representations Ẑl = [ẑl1 , . . . , ẑlT ] as


ẑlt = WSl zlt + blS ptS + WTl zlt + blT ptT


l l
l l
zt + blO ptO ,
(13)
zt + blN ptN + WO
+ WN

In other words, the hidden representations zlt are transformed using a convex
combination of the four STNO class-specific affine transformations, weighted
by the corresponding STNO class probabilities (4)-(7). When using a hard
STNO mask (i.e., one-hot encoding), equation (13) simplifies selecting and
applying one of the four class-specific transformations for each frame. Note
that the same transformation is applied to all frames with identical STNO
masks.
l
l
The matrices WSl , WTl , WN
, WO
are designed to transform the hidden
representations into a space where speaker distinction is more effective, or
where certain components of the signal can be suppressed. These transformations are essential for the model to correctly identify and isolate the target
speaker while handling other sources of noise.
However, fine-tuning the model with randomly initialized FDDT matrices
could disrupt its already learned internal representations [35]. To mitigate
this risk, we employ a suppressive initialization strategy. In this strategy,
0
as zero matrices, which effectively suppresses the
we initialize WS0 and WN
influence of other speakers; while the other parameters blS , blT , blN , blO (set
l
(set to identity matrices) are initialized to
to zero vectors), and WTl , WO
maintain stability and allow the model to process the STNO classes effectively.
4.5. Co-Attention Module for Speaker Interaction in TS-ASR
So far, we have discussed diarization conditioning approaches for TS-ASR.
In the previous sections, we designed the system to process each speaker independently as a target speaker, applying parallel processing for each one.
While effective in certain scenarios, this approach can be limiting when transcribing conversations involving multiple speakers, such as in meetings. It is
inherently suboptimal as it does not account for interactions between speakers. To address this limitation, we explore methods to model inter-speaker
dependencies.

13

×H

T
cat, proj

T

T

T

cat, proj

cat,
proj

T

Figure 2: Scheme of Co-Attention module. Dotted lines depict affine transformation
followed by layer norm. The gray rectangle depicts the definition of multi-headed attention
derived in (14). Inputs to scaled-dot product fAT attention are queries, keys and values
from top to bottom.

One such method is the Co-Attention module, which we present as a
means to effectively capture and manage these dependencies within the context of TS-ASR. Originally proposed for speaker diarization [36] and later
extended to speaker identification tasks [37], the Co-Attention module processes encoder outputs from multiple speakers, contextualizing these representations while addressing redundancies in overlapping speech transcripts.
The architecture of the Co-Attention module is depicted in Figure 2.
In the following method description, we adopt the notation introduced
in [37]. Let
H


(h)
(h)
(h)
fMA (X, Y; θMA ) := WO ∥ fAT WQ X, WK X, WV Y
(14)
h=1

be H-head attention parametrized by θMA , where fAT (Q, K, V) denotes scaled
dot-product attention [28], || represents concatenation along the first dimen(h)
(h)
(h)
sion, and θMA consists of the weight matrices {WQ , WK , WV }H
h=1 ∪{WO }.
Our Co-Attention version performs summarization of all speakers’ speech,
concatenation with per-speaker representations, and enriches original input
embeddings with derived contextual information. Given the encoder outputs
{Hs }Ss=1 for S speakers, where Hs ∈ Rdm ×T , speaker summarization is derived
14

as

"
A = LN WA

1X
Hs
S s

#!
,

(15)

ˆ

where WA ∈ Rd×dm projects the aggregated summary embeddings to a lowerˆ Per-speaker representations are defined as
dimension d.
′

Ms = LN (WM Hs ) ∈ Rd ×T ,

(16)

and concatenated across speakers to obtain
S

′

M = ∥ Ms ∈ RSd ×T .

(17)

s=1

Next, Co-Attention is performed to model interactions between speakers
M′s = LN (fMA (M, Ms ; θ) + Ms ) ,
A′ = LN (fMA (M, A; ξ) + A) ,

(18)

where H-head attention parameters θ and ξ share the same query and key
(h)
(h)
transformation matrices, WQ and WK , resulting in identical attention ma(h)
(h)
trices. Here, WQ and WK are block-diagonal matrices composed of S
′
′
individual matrices with dimensionality Rd /H×d all sharing the same parameters.
To further refine the representations, we apply self-attention to the contextualized summary embeddings.
Ā = LN (fMA (A′ , A′ ; ω) + A′ ) .

(19)

Finally, Ā is concatenated with each speaker’s co-attended representation
M′s , and a linear projection maps the combined output back to the original
space Rdm

′ ˆ
M̄s = WF M′s ||Ā , WF ∈ Rdm ×(d +d) .
(20)
The updated representation for speaker s is given by
Ĥs = Hs + M̄s .

15

(21)

Table 1: Numbers of files, minimum and maximum numbers of speakers per recording,
and numbers of hours per partition.

Dataset

train
development
test
#files #spk # h #files #spk # h #files #spk # h

AMI
NOTSOFAR-1

136
526

3-5 80.67
4-8 54.27

Libri2Mix
LibriCSS

13900
-

2
-

18
117

56.37 3000
7

4
9.67
4-6 12.17

16
160

3-4 9.06
3-7 16.67

2
8

3000
55

2
8

7.6
1.0

7.01
9.09

5. Experimental Setup
This section describes details of our experimental setup, including datasets,
evaluation metrics, training procedure, hyperparameters, and lastly, the diarization system. All our models were implemented in HuggingFace Transformers library [38]. We used Whisper-large-v3-turbo as it is a faster version
of large-v3, and we observed almost no performance degradation.
5.1. Evaluation Datasets
To validate the proposed method, we utilized two publicly available multispeaker datasets: AMI [17] and NOTSOFAR-1 [16]. Both have realistic
interactions in a far-field setting, presenting English-spoken meetings in a
challenging scenario. Statistics about the sets can be found in Tables 1 and 2.
To be able to compare with other existing methods, we also utilized
Libri2Mix [18] and LibriCSS [21].
Given the current state of technology and the availability of public datasets,
we believe results should be reported on real and not synthetic datasets.
5.2. Evaluation Metrics
Word error rate (WER) is normally used to evaluate single-speaker ASR.
It calculates the error of a hypothesis with respect to the reference as the
sum of substitutions, insertions, and deletions over the number of words in
the reference annotation. However, with recordings having more than one
speaker, different recognizers are usually evaluated with different metrics
depending on how the hypotheses and references are mapped. In order to be
able to compare with relevant previous works, we considered:

16

Table 2: Information about the percentage of silence, speech with a single speaker, and
overlap for each set.

Dataset

train
development
test
%sil %1-spk %ov %sil %1-spk %ov %sil %1-spk %ov

AMI
16.5
NOTSOFAR-1 8.1

72.3
65.4

11.2 22.0
26.5 17.7

61.1
68.8

16.9 14.7
13.7 8.0

67.9
66.6

17.4
25.2

Libri2Mix
LibriCSS

33.9
-

60.6 8.4
6.2

42.6
84.2

49.0 8.1
9.6 6.7

42.8
83.7

49.1
9.6

5.5
-

• Concatenated minimum-permutation WER (cpWER), where for each
speaker, all their utterances are concatenated, and the best permutation between hypothesis and reference is used to calculate the standard
WER. This metric calculates speaker-attributed ASR errors.
• Time-constrained minimum-permutation WER (tcpWER), where the
evaluation is like cp-WER but also considering the temporal alignments
of the words.
• Optimal reference combination WER (ORC-WER), which does not
consider the speaker labels and can be used to evaluate speaker-agnostic
systems.
• Time-constrained optimal reference combination WER (tcORC-WER),
where the evaluation optimally matches hypotheses and references without considering speaker labels but ensures that temporal alignments are
respected.
To avoid cluttering tables with notation, we do not write ‘WER’ in the
headers below. For a more thorough analysis and comparison of the metrics,
we refer the reader to [39]. For time-constrained metrics, we use a collar
of 5s. The diarization error rate (DER), used to evaluate the diarization
system, is calculated using collar 0s.
5.3. Training Details
The training is divided into three consecutive phases:
1. CTC preheat - pre-train only the CTC-related parameters on LibriSpeech 960h [40] with the rest of the model being frozen. CTC is
17

trained without timestamps as we believe that timestamp prediction
should not occur in the encoder and can rather be heuristically derived
from the CTC frame-by-frame predictions.
2. FDDT preheat - pre-train CTC and FDDT-related parameters on
the target multi-speaker dataset. We train FDDT parameters with
100× higher learning rate than the rest (i.e., 2 × 10−5 ) to improve the
model convergence.
3. Full fine-tuning - fine-tune all the parameters on the target multispeaker dataset until convergence.
We train all the models with an overall batch size of 64 samples using
AdamW [41] optimizer with weight decay 1×10−6 . We warm up the learning
rate for 5k steps (i.e., 5k per batch model updates) and then use a linear
decay scheduler for the rest of the training. The peak learning rate is set
to 2 × 10−7 . The CTC loss weight is set to λ = 0.3 [30]. We evaluate
the model on the development set at intervals of min(1 epoch, 500 steps),
monitor the development tcpWER, and use early stopping with a patience
of 5 evaluation steps. The maximum number of training steps is set to 50k,
and we will select the final model based on the best development tcpWER.
Please note that CTC Preheat training is independent of FDDT preheat and
full fine-tuning. For CTC Preheat, we use only 1k warm-up steps with a
peak learning rate of 2 × 10−4 , monitoring WER on Librispeech dev-clean
and dev-other sets. Other hyperparameters, including the batch size and
optimizer settings, remain unchanged.
Furthermore, we do not enforce true casing or lower casing. Instead,
we compute the cross-entropy loss with both lowercase and uppercase labels
and select the smaller loss value. We empirically chose the initial value of
the QK biasing constant c (10)-(12) to be 50 as we observed that higher
values result in fewer hallucinations at the beginning of training, while also
making it easier for the model to approximate a hard attention mask by
producing very low attention scores without having to scale up the query
and key projection weights.
5.4. Diarization System
We utilized DiariZen [42]4 which is based on a framework with local endto-end neural diarization (EEND) followed by speaker embedding cluster4

https://github.com/BUTSpeechFIT/DiariZen

18

ing [19, 43] using pyannote [20, 44]. The EEND module combines WavLM [45]
with Conformer [46] layers and is trained using the powerset loss [44]. The
EEND operates on 8-second-long overlapping segments, and for each speaker
found in the segment, a speaker embedding is extracted using a ResNet34based embedding extractor [14]. These are, in turn, clustered by spectral
clustering [47] to obtain the inter-segment mapping between speakers and
produce a single output for each recording. The hard decisions made by
the diarization system are used to provide the corresponding inputs for the
following ASR system. Note that we use the same model on all evaluation
sets. This model is compliant with the CHiME-8 challenge rules [16] for the
NOTSOFAR-1 track. Fine-tuning the model on each specific dataset could
lead to further improvements.
6. Experiments
This section presents a comparison of the proposed methods. First, we
compare our best configuration with other works considering both groundtruth and system diarization. We use cpWER to assess the quality of speakerattributed transcripts and ORC-WER to assess the quality of transcripts disregarding speaker assignment errors. However, these metrics do not penalize
the model for incorrectly determining the utterance timing, which is one of
the qualities that TS-ASR systems should, in our opinion, have. Hence,
we also report time-constrained metrics (i.e., tcpWER and tcORC-WER)
similar to the NOTSOFAR-1 challenge. Different works have reported different evaluation metrics for different datasets, so we report results using
the metrics used in the literature before and also all the time-constrained
metrics. We encourage researchers to compare their future work based on
time-constrained metrics. Note that calculating ORC-WER for some results
is infeasible, so we approximate these values using tcORC-WER instead by
increasing the time collar until tcORC-WER converges (the obtained metric
cannot be lower than ORC-WER).
First, we focus on comparing the proposed variants of diarization conditioning, presenting results across all datasets using ground-truth diarization,
followed by an analysis of the impact of real diarization on the results. Next,
we analyze the effect of joint CTC training and decoding on the NOTSOFAR1 dataset. We also report the impact of target-speaker training on singlespeaker evaluation datasets. Finally, we show the proposed diarization conditioning when using a different architecture to showcase that the method
19

can be applied to other ASR models.
6.1. Baseline Comparison
In this section, we begin by analyzing the performance of our bestperforming models, as summarized in Table 3, and comparing them to stateof-the-art results reported in the literature. Specifically, we use the bestperforming variants of our approach: the multi-domain (MD) FDDT model
for AMI-sdm, NOTSOFAR-1, and LibriCSS, and the single-domain (SD)
fine-tuned version with Co-Attention for Libri2Mix. These configurations
were selected to highlight our most effective methods on each dataset. For a
more detailed comparison of all proposed methods, refer to Table 4.
Even though comparisons across datasets are inherently challenging, as
different studies report results on different datasets, our models demonstrate
consistently strong performance. On AMI-sdm, to the best of our knowledge, we achieve state-of-the-art results with ground-truth diarization. Notably, the degradation when switching to real diarization is relatively small
for ORC-WER. However, for cpWER, the impact is significantly larger, indicating that errors related to speaker label assignment (linked to the confusion
errors in DER) have a more substantial effect than inaccuracies in segment
boundaries.
Our proposed method also achieves the best results to date on the Libri2Mix and LibriCSS datasets for both real- and ground-truth diarization. However, while these results are noteworthy, we consider evaluations on artificial
datasets like Libri2Mix to be of limited practical relevance.
6.2. Input masking vs. QK biasing vs. FDDT
Table 4 presents the performance of the methods proposed in Section 4. It
can be seen that the out-of-the-box Whisper model does not perform well, as
it lacks a mechanism to prevent transcribing all present speech, irrespective
of who is considered the target speaker. By masking the non-target speaker
audio (Input masking), we improve on all datasets substantially.
Furthermore, we can see that QK biasing after initialization (and before
fine-tuning) does not perform well, reaching WER metrics above 100%, suggesting strong levels of hallucination. After fine-tuning, we can see that not
shifting positional embeddings results in better performance with regard to
both tcpWER and tcORC WER. We further analyze the difference between
these two modifications in Table 5.

20

Table 3: Comparison of the proposed system alongside various multi-speaker ASR systems.
The top section includes systems where no additional information about speaker identity
or segmentation is provided. Our results are obtained using a diarization system. The
bottom section features models that directly or indirectly utilize ground-truth (oracle)
diarization information. Proposed ORC WER results marked with ⋆ were approximated
by increasing the collar for tcORC WER. Results marked with † are evaluated on utterance
groups, where the model is not penalized for speaker confusions outside the window of the
utterance group, which significantly reduces cpWER.

Kanda et al. [48] 21.2†
Raj et al. [49]
44.6†
Zarandi et al. [50]
Vinnikov et al. [16]
41.4
Cornell et al. [24] 24.5
Niu et al. [51]
22.2
Ours (real diar.)
23.6 18.0⋆ 33.5
Cornell et al. [24] 21.1
Ma et al. [25]
Zhang et al. [52]
Meng et al. [26]
Guo et al. [27]
22.0
Ours (oracle diar.) 17.2 16.5⋆ 19.7

ORC

cp

ORC

cp

ORC

cp

tcORC

tcp

ORC

cp

AMI-sdm NOTSOFAR-1
Libri2Mix
LibriCSS
test
eval-small test-clean test-both
test

16.9
7.8
35.5
17.7
22.6

6.0 6.0 15.0 14.9 8.5 6.5⋆
12.0

26.4
23.5

4.7
19.1

14.6
4.4 4.4 10.9 10.9 5.6 5.5⋆

Lastly, the third section of Table 4 presents FDDT. First, it can be observed that the method performs comparably to input masking right after
suppressive initialization, suggesting that the initialization does not break
the original Whisper model compared to QK biasing. Furthermore, after
single-domain (SD) fine-tuning (i.e., fine-tuning the model only on the corresponding training set), we can observe a massive improvement on all the
datasets.
Our model faces a challenge with fully overlapped speech, such as in
Libri2Mix, where two speakers spew concurrently most of the time. This
limitation arises from the model design, where each target speaker is decoded by an independent instance of the TS-ASR model. With fully over21

lapped speech, it might be difficult for an independent TS-ASR instance to
determine which speaker’s speech is responsible for decoding. As a consequence, multiple TS-ASR instances can decide to decode speech from the
same speaker. To mitigate this, we incorporate a Co-Attention mechanism
that allows the model to compare information across target speaker channels
(i.e., TS-ASR instances). This mechanism allows the channels to collaboratively decide which instance is responsible for decoding each speaker in the
input utterance. By resolving this ambiguity, Co-Attention reduces errors on
Libri2Mix by 2–3% absolute.
However, the improvement is not as significant on AMI or NOTSOFAR-1,
as these datasets have a significantly lower percentage of overlapped speech,
and also, more speakers are present, which makes the scenario more challenging.
FDDT MD refers to a multi-domain model, which utilizes training data
from AMI-sdm, NOTSOFAR-1, and Libri2Mix weighted with a ratio of 4:4:1.
We selected the best-performing checkpoint based on the NOTSOFAR-1 development set.
It can be seen that the model outperforms the other approaches on both
real datasets. However, it performs worse on Libri2Mix, suggesting the domain mismatch between real-world and synthetic mixtures. It also demonstrates that the increased amount of data is not solving the full overlap issue
and that a speaker interaction module is indeed necessary.
The addition of Co-Attention to the MD FDDT model slightly improves
performance on Libri2Mix compared to MD FDDT alone, indicating its potential to better handle fully overlapped speech in synthetic mixtures.
However, it remains inferior to the performance demonstrated by SD +
Co-Attention on Libri2Mix, where the smaller, more targeted domain training likely aligns better with the dataset’s specific characteristics. On the
other hand, MD FDDT + Co-Attention does not offer improvements on
AMI or NOTSOFAR-1, which may be attributed to the variability in the
number of speakers and the dynamic interaction patterns in these real-world
datasets. This variability affects the normalization of attention scores within
the Co-Attention module. This suggests that while Co-Attention provides
some benefits in specific scenarios, its integration with MD FDDT may require further design changes to handle diverse speaker configurations more
effectively.
Furthermore, Figure 3 shows the evolution of tcpWER of QK biasing and
FDDT. It can be seen that FDDT converges much quicker than QK biasing,
22

which is mainly caused by the non-disturbing initialization. After 1000 steps,
the FDDT approach reaches tcpWER below 30 %, suggesting that FDDT is
an effective module that quickly turns Whisper into a target-speaker model.
Table 4: Comparison of different diarization-conditioning methods. The table is divided
into three sections: the first section presents the performance of vanilla Whisper and Input
Masking methods, which do not require additional training; the second and third sections
show the results for QK biasing and FDDT with different configurations. An asterisk (*)
indicates values that could not be computed due to scalability issues, while a dash (—)
denotes single-domain setups (LibriCSS) where training data is unavailable.

tcORC

QKb init.
276.3 * 260.0
QKb w shift
55.8 54.1 65.3
QKb w/o shift 47.8 46.6 28.2

*
*
*

323.6 * 339.4 * 990.9
9.9 9.9 16.5 16.5
–
7.9 7.9 16.4 16.4
–

FDDT init.
78.3 68.7 89.7
FDDT SD
17.8 17.5 20.9
+ CoAttention 17.5 17.2 20.8
FDDT MD
17.6 16.7 19.7
+ CoAttention 18.1 17.7 20.0

77.5
20.3
20.3
19.1
19.4

tcp

66.1 66.1 69.4 69.4 588.2 *
42.2 42.1 47.9 47.9 56.2 55.0

tcp

tcORC

tcORC

tcp

*
54.0

tcp

tcORC

LibriCSS
test

Whisper
220.0 212.0 260.1
Input masking 52.8 47.9 61.6

tcp

tcORC

AMI-sdm NOTSOFAR-1
Libri2Mix
test
eval-small
test-clean test-both

*
–
–

100.6 96.1 105.9 100.4 102.0 101.9
6.3 6.3 13.8 13.8
–
–
4.4 4.4 11.0 11.0 –
–
6.9 6.9 15.9 15.9 8.8 8.8
5.8 5.8 14.4 14.4 11.0 11.0

6.2.1. QK Biasing Shift
Table 5 shows differences in cpWER and tcpWER between QK biasing
with and without shifted positional embeddings on three datasets: AMI-sdm,
NOTSOFAR, and Libri2Mix. An immediate observation is that both metrics
on Libri2Mix are exactly the same compared to the real datasets, which is
mainly caused by Libri2Mix being a short-form dataset — i.e., utterances are
shorter than 30s; thus, Whisper does not utilize timestamps for inference.
Also, the majority of the words are going to be within the collar boundaries,
not influencing reference alignment.
Furthermore, while QK biasing with shift provides a lower cpWER on
real datasets, it is worse on Libri2Mix, also probably due to the short-form
and synthetic nature of this dataset.
23

Table 5: Comparison of cpWER and tcpWER between QK biasing with and without
shifted positional embeddings with ground-truth diarization.

cp

tcp

cp

tcp

cp

tcp

Libri2Mix
test-clean test-both

tcp

QKb w shift
QKb w/o shift

NOTSOFAR-1
eval-small

cp

AMI-sdm
test
21.3
45.9

55.8
47.8

25.2
27.3

65.4
28.5

9.9
7.9

9.9
7.9

16.5
16.4

16.5
16.4

210
Input masking
FDDT
QK Biasing

tcpWER [%]

180
150
120
90
60
30
0

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

Training Steps
Figure 3: Test TCP-WER as a function of training steps for the NOTSOFAR-1 model
evaluated on the eval-small dataset.

This highlights the risk of drawing incorrect conclusions from interpretations developed on artificial evaluation data. Therefore, our analyses and
hypotheses are based on results obtained from the real datasets AMI-sdm
and NOTSOFAR-1.
It can be seen that shifting positional embeddings helps transcription
quality on AMI-sdm (24.6% absolute cpWER improvement) and NOTSOFAR (2.1% absolute cpWER improvement) datasets. We suspect that encoder attention masking creates “holes” in the positional information in the
encoder’s output to which the decoder cross-attends, potentially causing the
decoder to lose track of the position in the input sequence and hallucinate.
On the other hand, the gap between cp and tcp WER suggests that the
positional information is not accurate after shifting positional embeddings
and that the Whisper model timestamp prediction heavily relies on the positional embeddings added to the encoder input. However, if we do not shift
the positional embeddings, the gap between cp and tcpWER decreases to a
24

few percent on both the AMI-sdm and NOTSOFAR-1 datasets.
6.3. Performance with Real Diarization
We have demonstrated that our proposed DiCoW model achieves strong
performance when high-quality speaker and segmentation information is provided. We also evaluated our proposed system with real diarization (cf. Section 5.4). In this section, we focus on a more detailed analysis of the impact
of diarization errors on DiCoW. We use the FDDT model fine-tuned on all
datasets (AMI-sdm, NOTSOFAR-1, Libri2Mix).
As shown in Table 6, the performance deteriorates significantly with respect to the system with ground-truth diarization. This decline is primarily
attributed to errors introduced by the diarization process (cf. Table 7).
On the NOTSOFAR-1 eval-small dataset, we achieved a tcpWER of
33.5 % (22.6 % tcORC-WER), with 14.5 % (8.3 %) deletions, 10 % (3.6 %)
insertions, and 9 % (10.7 %) substitutions, indicating that the system struggles with omissions in this scenario. This is expected, given that this dataset
features recordings with a higher number of speakers on average and significantly more overlapping speech, both of which increase the likelihood of
confusion errors during diarization. In contrast, LibriCSS has fewer overlapping segments and fewer speakers per recording. However, most of the
diarization errors in LibriCSS (cf. Table 7) are caused by missed speech,
which results in 4 % deletions, 4 % substitutions and 3 % insertions.
The errors are partly due to the model being trained with ground-truth
diarization, which provides accurate speaker boundaries and correctly labeled
silence. In contrast, real diarization can miss portions of a speaker’s speech,
particularly in scenarios with more than two overlapping speakers. The system struggles to recover from missed speech segments because it has not
encountered such cases during training. Moreover, we initialize the FDDT
parameters in such a way that the model ignores frames marked as silence
from the very beginning (cf. Section 4.4). This further limits the system’s
ability to recover from diarization errors.
The proposed DiCoW model is designed to handle soft diarization decisions in the form of frame-by-frame speaker activity probabilities d(s, t).
However, in this work, we use only hard diarization decisions for both training and inference. As the result, the probabilities d(s, t) and, consequently,
the STNO class probabilities (4)-(7) are restricted to binary values 0 or 1.
For training, we rely solely on hard ground-truth diarization decisions.
Using real diarization outputs introduces the additional challenge of align25

Table 6: Comparison of overall performance with ground-truth and proposed diarization
system. Both ground-truth and real system results were obtained with a model trained
on multiple datasets (cf. FDDT MD in Table 4).

tcORC

tcp

15.9 15.9 8.8 8.8
20.6 20.5 11.0 8.9

tcORC

tcp

6.9
8.3

tcp

tcORC

6.9
8.4

tcORC

tcp

19.1
22.6

tcp

Ground-truth 17.6 16.7 19.7
Real system 25.0 18.2 33.5

Diarization

tcORC

AMI-sdm NOTSOFAR-1
Libri2Mix
LibriCSS
eval-small
test-clean test-both
test
test

Table 7: Diarization performance on the test set of each corpus.

Dataset

DER Miss FA Conf.

AMI-sdm
NOTSOFAR-1
Libri2Mix (mix clean)
Libri2Mix (mix both)
LibriCSS

17.3
22.0
4.8
10.0
5.5

8.7
7.0
0.3
1.2
3.6

3.8
6.2
4.1
8.4
0.4

4.8
8.8
0.4
0.4
1.5

ing the speakers identified by the diarization system with the ground-truth
speakers labeled in the ASR annotations. This alignment becomes especially
problematic when the diarization system predicts an incorrect number of
speakers.
In our system submitted to the CHiME-8 challenge [53] (closely following the method described in this paper), we demonstrated that soft diarization decisions can improve ASR decoding performance. However, subsequent
analysis revealed that these improvements were largely due to the overly aggressive post-processing used to derive hard decisions in our earlier diarization system. Therefore, in this work, we always use hard diarization decisions
– whether from the ground-truth or the real diarization outputs – during decoding, as this approach matches the setup used during training. Note that
in such a case, equation (13) defining the FDDT transform reduces to a
straightforward selection of one of the affine transformations corresponding
to the respective STNO classes.
Incorporating soft activations into the current framework remains an open
problem for future work.
26

Table 8: Performance of the method with and without the CTC head on the NOTSFOAR1 eval set, evaluated using tcpWER with a 5s collar. The table compares the effects
of varying λ values in (3). When λ = 1.0, decoding is still primarily guided by the
autoregressive model, and only the top 1000 tokens are rescored by CTC. The ‘CTC only’
column shows performance when the model uses only CTC for decoding.

greedy
beam 5

w/o CTC head

λ=0

λ = 0.2

λ = 1.0

CTC only

22.9
22.2

22.1
21.7

21.7
20.9

27.9
32.0

46.5
52.8

6.4. Extending Whisper with Joint CTC/Attention Training and Decoding
Table 8 shows the effect of the CTC head on speaker-attributed ASR
performance. First, we observe a significant improvement in tcpWER simply
by adding joint training with the CTC head, even without using it during
decoding (see λ = 0). This highlights the importance of guiding the training
by enforcing a monotonic alignment between input frames and the output
token sequence, as the Whisper decoder (or AED ASR) does not assume such
alignment by default. Furthermore, using the CTC head for joint decoding
further improves the performance (see λ = 0.2), although we note that using
only the CTC head for decoding is significantly worse than the Whisper
decoder. Overall, we surmise that the CTC head mitigates some of Whisper’s
hallucinatory tendencies despite being considerably worse as a standalone
decoder.
6.5. Does Target-Speaker Training Affect Single-Speaker Performance?
Next, we examine the performance of the proposed TS-ASR on singlespeaker datasets to quantify the impact of our method on the performance
of the original Whisper model on single-speaker speech. This experiment
was conducted on LibriSpeech [40], TED-LIUM [54], and VoxPopuli [55]
evaluation sets. The results are presented in Table 9.
On the Librispeech test sets, we observe that the proposed model slightly
outperforms the baseline Whisper model, likely due to the inclusion of the
LibriSpeech training data in our fine-tuning dataset. However, we observe
performance degradation on TED-LIUM and VoxPopuli, a degradation which
is especially pronounced when we incorporate the CTC head, both standalone
and as part of joint decoding. This is unsurprising, as the CTC head is trained
on a much more limited set of data than the original Whisper model. Overall,
we infer that the proposed training method still maintains Whisper’s abilities
27

Table 9: Comparison of the proposed method and original Whisper on single-speaker
speech with both greedy (beam size 1) and beam-search (beam size 5) decoding. λ = 0.0
indicates no use of auxilary CTC logits during decoding despite training with auxilary
CTC loss.

beam
LibriSpeech
TED-LIUM VoxPopuli
λ
size
test-clean test-other
test
test
Whisper
CTC head
Proposed
Proposed

1
1
1
1

0.0
0.2

2.5
3.9
2.1
1.9

4.5
7.3
4.3
4.1

4.3
8.4
5.3
8.5

10.9
16.1
11.2
11.7

Whisper
Proposed
Proposed

5
5
5

0.0
0.2

2.2
2.1
1.9

4.3
4.2
4.0

4.3
5.0
7.8

10.0
11.0
11.2

to handle single-talker ASR but slightly degrades its domain generalization
capabilities.
6.6. Non-Whisper Models
To verify that our method is not Whisper-specific, we took an ESPNet [34] LibriSpeech recipe5 and trained attention-based encoder decoder
(AED) model, namely Branchformer CTC-AED [56] on LibriSpeech 960h [40].
Then, we added additional FDDT parameters to the pre-trained model and
fine-tuned it on the AMI-sdm dataset segmented the same way as for Whisper
fine-tuning.
To show that FDDT really improves the TS-ASR performance, we performed the inference in two regimes: a) utterance-level; and b) segmentgroup, following the evaluation protocol from [48].
Table 10: Comparison of ORC-WER of fine-tuned Branchformer inference methods on
AMI-sdm.

Inference Style
utterance-level
segment-group
5

Baseline
34.5
141.2

with FDDT
34.5
26.8

https://github.com/espnet/espnet/tree/master/egs2/librispeech/asr1

28

Table 10 presents ORC-WER for two models per each inference style. For
baseline, we took a fine-tuned model with FDDT parameters and adjusted
STNO masks such that the target speaker is always active in a given segment.
We can see that in the case of utterance-level inference style, diarization information does not provide any improvement over the baseline, as the segments
are usually single-speaker with occasional overlap. In the case of overlap, the
STNO mask has only target-speaker and overlapped masks active, as there
is no silence nor non-target speaker present in the utterance-level segments.
Also, there may not be enough context for transcribing overlaps well. Furthermore, there are many segments that contain almost perfect overlap. In
such a case, the model fails to properly separate the overlapped transcripts.
On the other hand, there is a significant difference between the two models in the case of segment-group inference style (114.4% absolute). It is
mainly due to the Baseline model transcribing all the speakers within the
segment-group; hence, introducing many insertions. This difference proves
that by adding FDDT and performing fine-tuning, we efficiently transform
a single-talker model into a TS-ASR model. Furthermore, the difference
between utterance-level and segment-group performance with FDDT parameters demonstrates that TS-ASR models may benefit from a longer context. Specifically, the model using FDDT parameters achieved a 7.7 % absolute improvement in performance on segment-group inference compared to
utterance-level inference.
7. Discussion
Despite its promising results, the proposed approach has several limitations:
• Dependency on accurate diarization: DiCoW’s performance is strongly
influenced by the quality of the diarization system. Poor diarization,
such as in high-overlap or noisy environments, can degrade the overall
effectiveness of the model.
• Performance on synthetic versus real data: While the approach shows
strong results on both synthetic and real-world datasets, it faces challenges adapting from synthetic benchmarks like Libri2Mix to real-world
scenarios due to domain mismatches.

29

• Scalability with increasing speaker count: DiCoW’s computational complexity and performance are affected in scenarios with a large number
of speakers, as the model processes each speaker independently.
• Handling of overlapping speech: Although the Co-Attention mechanism
addresses overlapping speech to some extent, fully overlapped segments
involving multiple dominant speakers remain challenging.
• Limited validation on unseen conditions: While we validated DiCoW
across several datasets, further testing under diverse acoustic environments, speaker characteristics, and languages is necessary to better
understand its generalization capabilities.
Addressing these limitations in future work will help refine the approach
and broaden its applicability to a wider range of real-world scenarios.
8. Conclusion
In this study, we presented DiCoW, an approach to extend a singlespeaker ASR system to perform target/multi-speaker ASR using a diarization
conditioning scheme. The main contributions are:
• Integration of diarization for target-speaker ASR: DiCoW directly conditions Whisper’s ASR capabilities on speaker diarization outputs, bypassing traditional speaker embeddings. This simplifies the workflow,
reduces dependency on synthetic data, and improves generalization to
unseen speakers.
• Extension of long-form ASR to multi-speaker scenarios: By building on
Whisper’s long-form transcription abilities, DiCoW effectively handles
overlapping speech and real-world multi-speaker recordings, enabling
more reliable transcription for conversations, meetings, and other challenging audio environments.
• Efficient fine-tuning of pre-trained ASR models: DiCoW leverages largescale pre-trained models like Whisper, fine-tuning them with diarization conditioning to deliver strong performance across diverse datasets.
This approach minimizes training costs while achieving notable accuracy gains on real-world benchmarks such as AMI and NOTSOFAR-1.
30

Additionally, we extended Whisper with a “CTC head” to mitigate hallucinations and compared different conditioning approaches in terms of ASR
performance and speed of convergence, highlighting the advantages of FrameLevel Diarization-Dependent Transformations (FDDT). We demonstrated
that adapting Whisper for multi-speaker ASR does not substantially degrade its performance on single-speaker recordings, although some loss of
generalization capabilities was observed.
Moreover, while most analyses were based on Whisper, we showed that
the proposed method can also be successful with other models, such as AEDbased ASR, demonstrating the general effectiveness of the approach.
We have successfully demonstrated that our DiCoW model achieves strong
performance across various datasets when provided with ground-truth diarization. In future work, we aim to extend the framework incorporating real
speaker diarization information into training in order to reduce the performance drop that comes from training exclusively on ground-truth diarization
and only using real diarization during inference.
To facilitate future comparisons and analysis, we release our code and
recipes at https://github.com/BUTSpeechFIT/TS-ASR-Whisper.
Acknowledgement
The work was supported by the Czech Ministry of Education (MoE)
through OP JAK project No. ID:CZ.02.01.01/00/23 020/0008518, Brno
Ph.D. Talent Scholarship Programme, and by National Science Foundation
CCRI Grant No 2120435. Computing and data repository/services were supported by MoE through e-INFRA CZ (ID:90254) and LINDAT/CLARIAHCZ LRI (ID:90262) respectively.
References
[1] J. Li, et al., Recent advances in end-to-end automatic speech recognition, APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing 11 (1)
(2022).
[2] S. Watanabe, M. Mandel, J. Barker, E. Vincent, A. Arora, X. Chang,
S. Khudanpur, V. Manohar, D. Povey, D. Raj, et al., CHiME-6 challenge: Tackling multispeaker speech recognition for unsegmented recordings, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09249 (2020).
31

[3] F. Yu, S. Zhang, Y. Fu, L. Xie, S. Zheng, Z. Du, W. Huang,
P. Guo, Z. Yan, B. Ma, X. Xu, H. Bu, M2MeT: The ICASSP
2022 Multi-Channel Multi-Party Meeting Transcription Challenge,
in: ICASSP 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2022, pp. 6167–6171.
doi:10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9746465.
[4] S. Cornell, M. S. Wiesner, S. Watanabe, D. Raj, X. Chang, P. Garcia,
Y. Masuyam, Z.-Q. Wang, S. Squartini, S. Khudanpur, The CHiME7 DASR Challenge: Distant Meeting Transcription with Multiple Devices in Diverse Scenarios, in: 7th International Workshop on Speech
Processing in Everyday Environments (CHiME 2023), 2023, pp. 1–6.
doi:10.21437/CHiME.2023-1.
[5] S. Cornell, T. J. Park, H. Huang, C. Boeddeker, X. Chang, M. Maciejewski, M. S. Wiesner, P. Garcia, S. Watanabe, The CHiME-8 DASR Challenge for Generalizable and Array Agnostic Distant Automatic Speech
Recognition and Diarization, in: 8th International Workshop on Speech
Processing in Everyday Environments (CHiME 2024), 2024, pp. 1–6.
doi:10.21437/CHiME.2024-1.
[6] N. Bhandari, D. Chen, M. A. del Rı́o Fernández, N. Delworth, J. D.
Fox, M. Jetté, Q. McNamara, C. Miller, O. Novotný, J. Profant, N. Qin,
M. Ratajczak, J.-P. Robichaud, Reverb: Open-Source ASR and Diarization from Rev, arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03930 (2024).
[7] T. Yoshioka, I. Abramovski, C. Aksoylar, Z. Chen, M. David, D. Dimitriadis, Y. Gong, I. Gurvich, X. Huang, Y. Huang, A. Hurvitz,
L. Jiang, S. Koubi, E. Krupka, I. Leichter, C. Liu, P. Parthasarathy,
A. Vinnikov, L. Wu, X. Xiao, W. Xiong, H. Wang, Z. Wang,
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, T. Zhou, Advances in Online Audio-Visual
Meeting Transcription, in: 2019 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), 2019, pp. 276–283.
doi:10.1109/ASRU46091.2019.9003827.
[8] D. Raj, P. Denisov, Z. Chen, H. Erdogan, Z. Huang, M. He, S. Watanabe, J. Du, T. Yoshioka, Y. Luo, N. Kanda, J. Li, S. Wisdom, J. R.
Hershey, Integration of Speech Separation, Diarization, and Recognition for Multi-Speaker Meetings: System Description, Comparison, and
32

Analysis, in: 2021 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT),
2021, pp. 897–904. doi:10.1109/SLT48900.2021.9383556.
[9] N. Kanda, S. Horiguchi, R. Takashima, Y. Fujita, K. Nagamatsu,
S. Watanabe, Auxiliary interference speaker loss for target-speaker
speech recognition, Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, INTERSPEECH 2019September (2019) 236–240. doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2019-1126.
[10] M. Karafiát, L. Burget, P. Matějka, O. Glembek, J. Černockỳ, iVectorbased discriminative adaptation for automatic speech recognition, in:
2011 IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition & Understanding, IEEE, 2011, pp. 152–157.
[11] Z. Huang, D. Raj, P. Garcı́a, S. Khudanpur, Adapting Self-Supervised
Models to Multi-Talker Speech Recognition Using Speaker Embeddings, in: ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023, pp. 1–5.
doi:10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10097139.
[12] N. Dehak, P. J. Kenny, R. Dehak, P. Dumouchel, P. Ouellet, Front-end
factor analysis for speaker verification, IEEE Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing 19 (4) (2010) 788–798.
[13] D. Snyder, D. Garcia-Romero, G. Sell, D. Povey, S. Khudanpur, Xvectors: Robust dnn embeddings for speaker recognition, in: 2018
IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing
(ICASSP), IEEE, 2018, pp. 5329–5333.
[14] H. Wang, C. Liang, S. Wang, Z. Chen, B. Zhang, X. Xiang, Y. Deng,
Y. Qian, Wespeaker: A research and production oriented speaker embedding learning toolkit, in: IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[15] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, I. Sutskever,
Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2023, pp. 28492–28518.
[16] A. Vinnikov, A. Ivry, A. Hurvitz, I. Abramovski, S. Koubi, I. Gurvich,
S. Peer, X. Xiao, B. M. Elizalde, N. Kanda, X. Wang, S. Shaer, S. Yagev,
33

Y. Asher, S. Sivasankaran, Y. Gong, M. Tang, H. Wang, E. Krupka,
NOTSOFAR-1 Challenge: New Datasets, Baseline, and Tasks for Distant Meeting Transcription, in: Interspeech 2024, 2024, pp. 5003–5007.
doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2024-1788.
[17] I. Mccowan, J. Carletta, W. Kraaij, S. Ashby, S. Bourban, M. Flynn,
M. Guillemot, T. Hain, J. Kadlec, V. Karaiskos, M. Kronenthal,
G. Lathoud, M. Lincoln, A. Lisowska Masson, W. Post, D. Reidsma,
P. Wellner, The ami meeting corpus, Int’l. Conf. on Methods and Techniques in Behavioral Research (01 2005).
[18] J. Cosentino, M. Pariente, S. Cornell, A. Deleforge, E. Vincent, LibriMix: An Open-Source Dataset for Generalizable Speech Separation,
arXiv: Audio and Speech Processing (2020).
URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:218862876
[19] K. Kinoshita, M. Delcroix, N. Tawara, Integrating end-to-end neural
and clustering-based diarization: Getting the best of both worlds, in:
Proc. ICASSP, IEEE, 2021, pp. 7198–7202.
[20] H. Bredin, pyannote. audio 2.1 speaker diarization pipeline: principle,
benchmark, and recipe, in: Proc. Interspeech 2023, 2023, pp. 1983–1987.
[21] Z. Chen, T. Yoshioka, L. Lu, T. Zhou, Z. Meng, Y. Luo, J. Wu, X. Xiao,
J. Li, Continuous speech separation: Dataset and analysis, in: ICASSP
2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2020, pp. 7284–7288.
[22] L. E. Shafey, H. Soltau, I. Shafran, Joint Speech Recognition and
Speaker Diarization via Sequence Transduction, in: Interspeech 2019,
2019, pp. 396–400. doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2019-1943.
[23] N. Kanda, X. Xiao, Y. Gaur, X. Wang, Z. Meng, Z. Chen, T. Yoshioka,
Transcribe-to-diarize: Neural speaker diarization for unlimited number
of speakers using end-to-end speaker-attributed ASR, in: ICASSP 20222022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2022, pp. 8082–8086.
[24] S. Cornell, J.-w. Jung, S. Watanabe, S. Squartini, One Model to Rule
Them All? Towards End-to-End Joint Speaker Diarization and Speech
34

Recognition, in: ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, 2024, pp.
11856–11860.
[25] H. Ma, Z. Peng, M. Shao, J. Li, J. Liu, Extending Whisper with
prompt tuning to target-speaker ASR, in: ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), IEEE, 2024, pp. 12516–12520.
[26] L. Meng, J. Kang, Y. Wang, Z. Jin, X. Wu, X. Liu, H. Meng, Empowering Whisper as a Joint Multi-Talker and Target-Talker Speech
Recognition System, in: Interspeech 2024, 2024, pp. 4653–4657.
doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2024-971.
[27] P. Guo, X. Chang, H. Lv, S. Watanabe, L. Xie, SQ-Whisper: SpeakerQuerying based Whisper Model for Target-Speaker ASR, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.05589 (2024).
[28] A. Vaswani, Attention is all you need, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (2017).
[29] S. Gandhi, P. von Platen, A. M. Rush, Distil-whisper: Robust
knowledge distillation via large-scale pseudo labelling, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.00430 (2023).
[30] S. Watanabe, T. Hori, S. Kim, J. R. Hershey, T. Hayashi, Hybrid
CTC/attention architecture for end-to-end speech recognition, IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing 11 (8) (2017) 1240–1253.
[31] A. Graves, S. Fernández, F. Gomez, J. Schmidhuber, Connectionist temporal classification: labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent
neural networks, in: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML ’06, Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2006, p. 369–376. doi:10.1145/1143844.1143891.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1143844.1143891
[32] T. Hori, S. Watanabe, J. Hershey, Joint CTC/attention decoding for
end-to-end speech recognition, in: R. Barzilay, M.-Y. Kan (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for
35

Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada, 2017, pp. 518–529.
doi:10.18653/v1/P17-1048.
URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1048
[33] Y. Leviathan, M. Kalman, Y. Matias, Fast Inference from Transformers
via Speculative Decoding, in: A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho, B. Engelhardt, S. Sabato, J. Scarlett (Eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, Vol. 202 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, PMLR, 2023, pp. 19274–19286.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/leviathan23a.html
[34] S. Watanabe, T. Hori, S. Karita, T. Hayashi, J. Nishitoba, Y. Unno,
N. Enrique Yalta Soplin, J. Heymann, M. Wiesner, N. Chen,
A. Renduchintala, T. Ochiai, ESPnet: End-to-end speech processing toolkit, in: Proceedings of Interspeech, 2018, pp. 2207–2211.
doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2018-1456.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2018-1456
[35] A. Polok, D. Klement, M. Wiesner, S. Khudanpur, J. Černocký, L. Burget, Target Speaker ASR with Whisper (2024). arXiv:2409.09543.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.09543
[36] S. Horiguchi, Y. Takashima, P. Garcı́a, S. Watanabe, Y. Kawaguchi,
Multi-Channel End-To-End Neural Diarization with Distributed Microphones, in: ICASSP 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2022, pp. 7332–
7336. doi:10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.9746749.
[37] L. Mošner, R. Serizel, L. Burget, O. Plchot, E. Vincent, J. Peng,
J. Černocký, Multi-channel extension of pre-trained models for speaker
verification, in: Proceedings of Interspeech 2024, Vol. 2024, International Speech Communication Association, 2024, pp. 2135–2139.
doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2024-1260.
URL https://www.fit.vut.cz/research/publication/13322
[38] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V. Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi, P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf, M. Funtowicz, J. Davison, S. Shleifer, P. von
Platen, C. Ma, Y. Jernite, J. Plu, C. Xu, T. L. Scao, S. Gugger,
M. Drame, Q. Lhoest, A. M. Rush, Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing, in: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
36

Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2020, pp.
38–45.
URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.emnlp-demos.6
[39] T. v. Neumann, C. B. Boeddeker, M. Delcroix, R. Haeb-Umbach,
MeetEval: A Toolkit for Computation of Word Error Rates for Meeting
Transcription Systems, in: Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Speech Processing in Everyday Environments (CHiME 2023),
2023, pp. 27–32. doi:10.21437/CHiME.2023-6.
[40] V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, S. Khudanpur, Librispeech: An ASR
corpus based on public domain audio books, in: 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2015,
pp. 5206–5210. doi:10.1109/ICASSP.2015.7178964.
[41] I. Loshchilov, F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization, in: International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019, pp. 1–18.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7
[42] J. Han, F. Landini, J. Rohdin, A. Silnova, M. Diez, L. Burget, Leveraging Self-Supervised Learning for Speaker Diarization, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.09408 (2024).
[43] K. Kinoshita, M. Delcroix, N. Tawara, Advances in integration of endto-end neural and clustering-based diarization for real conversational
speech, in: Proc. Interspeech, 2021, pp. 3565–3569.
[44] A. Plaquet, H. Bredin, Powerset multi-class cross entropy loss for neural
speaker diarization, in: INTERSPEECH 2023, 2023, pp. 3222–3226.
doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2023-205.
[45] S. Chen, C. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Li, N. Kanda,
T. Yoshioka, X. Xiao, et al., Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pretraining for full stack speech processing, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Signal Processing 16 (6) (2022) 1505–1518.
[46] A. Gulati, J. Qin, C.-C. Chiu, N. Parmar, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, W. Han,
S. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu, et al., Conformer: Convolution-augmented
transformer for speech recognition, in: Proc. Interspeech, 2020, pp.
5036–5040.
37

[47] T. J. Park, K. J. Han, M. Kumar, S. Narayanan, Auto-tuning spectral
clustering for speaker diarization using normalized maximum eigengap,
IEEE Signal Processing Letters 27 (2019) 381–385.
[48] N. Kanda, G. Ye, Y. Wu, Y. Gaur, X. Wang, Z. Meng,
Z. Chen, T. Yoshioka, Large-Scale Pre-Training of End-to-End MultiTalker ASR for Meeting Transcription with Single Distant Microphone, in: Proceedings of Interspeech 2021, 2021, pp. 3430–3434.
doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2021-102.
[49] D. Raj, D. Povey, S. Khudanpur, SURT 2.0:
Advances in
Transducer-Based Multi-Talker Speech Recognition, IEEE/ACM
Trans. Audio, Speech and Lang. Proc. 31 (2023) 3800–3813.
doi:10.1109/TASLP.2023.3318398.
URL https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2023.3318398
[50] M. Fazel-Zarandi, W.-N. Hsu, Cocktail Hubert: Generalized SelfSupervised Pre-Training for Mixture and Single-Source Speech, in:
ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023, pp. 1–5.
doi:10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10096630.
[51] S. Niu, R. Wang, J. Du, G. Yang, Y. Tu, S. Wu, S. Qian, H. Wu, H. Xu,
X. Zhang, G. Zhong, X. Yu, J. Chen, M. Wang, D. Cai, T. Gao, G. Wan,
F. Ma, J. Pan, J. Gao, The USTC-NERCSLIP Systems for the CHiME8 NOTSOFAR-1 Challenge, in: 8th International Workshop on Speech
Processing in Everyday Environments (CHiME 2024), 2024, pp. 31–36.
doi:10.21437/CHiME.2024-7.
[52] W. Zhang, Y. Qian, Weakly-Supervised Speech Pre-training: A Case
Study on Target Speech Recognition, in: Proc. INTERSPEECH 2023,
2023, pp. 3517–3521. doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2023-1280.
[53] A. Polok, D. Klement, J. Han, S. Sedláček, B. Yusuf, M. Maciejewski,
M. Wiesner, L. Burget, BUT/JHU System Description for CHiME-8
NOTSOFAR-1 Challenge, in: 8th International Workshop on Speech
Processing in Everyday Environments (CHiME 2024), 2024, pp. 18–22.
doi:10.21437/CHiME.2024-4.

38

[54] A. Rousseau, P. Deléglise, Y. Estève, TED-LIUM: an automatic speech
recognition dedicated corpus, in: N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, T. Declerck,
M. U. Doğan, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, A. Moreno, J. Odijk, S. Piperidis
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), European Language Resources
Association (ELRA), Istanbul, Turkey, 2012, pp. 125–129.
URL http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/698_
Paper.pdf
[55] C. Wang, M. Riviere, A. Lee, A. Wu, C. Talnikar, D. Haziza,
M. Williamson, J. Pino, E. Dupoux, VoxPopuli: A large-scale multilingual speech corpus for representation learning, semi-supervised
learning and interpretation, in: C. Zong, F. Xia, W. Li, R. Navigli
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2021, pp. 993–1003.
doi:10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.80.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.80
[56] Y. Peng, S. Dalmia, I. Lane, S. Watanabe, Branchformer: Parallel MLPAttention Architectures to Capture Local and Global Context for Speech
Recognition and Understanding, in: K. Chaudhuri, S. Jegelka, L. Song,
C. Szepesvari, G. Niu, S. Sabato (Eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, Vol. 162 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, PMLR, 2022, pp. 17627–17643.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/peng22a.html

39

